OCPBUGS-30568 Inheritance for Machine Config Pools (#81214)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/update-using-custom-machine-config-pools-inheritance.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/updating_a_cluster/update-using-custom-machine-config-pools.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="update-using-custom-machine-config-pools-mcp-inheritance_{context}"]
= Managing machine configuration inheritance for a worker pool canary

You can configure a machine config pool (MCP) canary to inherit any `MachineConfig` assigned to an existing MCP. 

> This is useful if, for example, you want to use a canary MCP to test as you update the nodes of an existing MCP, one at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration is useful when you want to use an MCP canary to test as you update the nodes of an existing MCP, one at a time.
```

Author: Thanks for the review @ShaunaDiaz

.Prerequisites

* You have created one or more custom machine config pools (MCP).

.Procedure

> . Create a secondary MCP. 

Reviewer: Better for accessiblity

> .. Save the following file as `machineConfigPool.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Save the following configuration file as `machineConfigPool.yaml`.
```
any specific directory?

Author: I don't think we need to specify a directory to save  it to. The user just saves it locally then applies it in the next step.

+

> [source,yaml]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example `machineConfigPool` YAML
[source,yaml]
```

----
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfigPool
metadata:
  name: worker-perf
spec:
  machineConfigSelector:
    matchExpressions:
      - {
         key: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role,
         operator: In,
         values: [worker,worker-perf]
        }
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf: "" 
----
+
.. Create the new machine config pool by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f machineConfigPool.yaml
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,terminal]
----
machineconfigpool.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/worker-perf created
----

. Add some machines to the secondary MCP.

> This example labels the worker nodes, `worker-b` and `worker-c` to the MCP `worker-perf`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example labels the worker nodes, `worker-b` and `worker-c` to the MCP `worker-perf`:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node worker-b node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf=''
$ oc label node worker-c node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf=''
----

> . Create a new `MachineConfig` for the MCP `worker-perf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a new `MachineConfig` for the MCP `worker-perf` as described in the following two steps:
```

.. Save the following `MachineConfig` example as `new-machineconfig.yaml`.
+

> [source,yaml]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example `MachineConfig` YAML
[source,yaml]
```

----
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfig
metadata:
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: workers-perf
  name: 06-kdump-enable-workers-perf
spec:
  config:
    ignition:
      version: 3.2.0
    systemd:
      units:
      - enabled: true
        name: kdump.service
  kernelArguments:

>     - crashkernel=512M

Reviewer: can this be configured? or is 512M the only valid value?

Author: I think this is just an example value. The important point comes up during verification where the user can check that this value has been set as specified.

Reviewer 2: +1

----

.. Apply the `MachineConfig` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f new-machineconfig.yaml
----

> . Create the new canary MCP and add machines from the MCP you created above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create the new canary MCP and add machines from the MCP you created in the previous steps.
```

> This example creates the an MCP called `worker-perf-canary` MCP, and adds machines from the `worker-perf` to it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates the an MCP called `worker-perf-canary` MCP, and adds machines from the `worker-perf` to it. 
```

.. Label the canary worker node `worker-a` by running the following command: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node worker-a node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf-canary=''
----

.. Save the following file as `machineConfigPool-Canary.yaml`.
+

> [source,yaml]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example `machineConfigPool-Canary.yaml` file
[source,yaml]
```

----
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfigPool
metadata:
  name: worker-perf-canary
spec:
  machineConfigSelector:
    matchExpressions:
      - {
         key: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role,
         operator: In,
         values: [worker-perf,worker-perf-canary] <1>
        }
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf-canary: ""
----

> <1> This exmaple includes `worker-perf-canary` as an optional value. You can use a value in this way to configure members of an additional `MachineConfig`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Optional value. The `worker-perf-canary` value is use in this example. You can use a value in this way to configure members of an additional `MachineConfig`.
```
what are valid values?

Author: the value here is the name of an MCP. So any MCP name is valid. What's optional here is the inclusion of an additional MCP.

> .. Create the new worker-perf-canary by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Create the new `worker-perf-canary` by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get nodes
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME       STATUS   ROLES                        AGE     VERSION
...
worker-a   Ready    worker,worker-perf-canary   5d15h   v1.27.13+e709aa5
worker-b   Ready    worker,worker-perf          5d15h   v1.27.13+e709aa5
worker-c   Ready    worker,worker-perf          5d15h   v1.27.13+e709aa5
----

.. Verify that `kdump` service is enabled on `worker-a` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ systemctl status kdump.service
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME       STATUS   ROLES                        AGE     VERSION
...
kdump.service - Crash recovery kernel arming
     Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/kdump.service; enabled; preset: disabled)
     Active: active (exited) since Tue 2024-09-03 12:44:43 UTC; 10s ago
    Process: 4151139 ExecStart=/usr/bin/kdumpctl start (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
   Main PID: 4151139 (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
----

.. Verify that the MCP has updated the `crashkernel` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat /proc/cmdline
----
+

> .Example output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The output should include the updated `crashekernel` value, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output should include the updated `crashekernel` value, for example:
+
.Example output
```

Author: Sorry, messed that up somehow.

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/updating_a_cluster/update-using-custom-machine-config-pools.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="update-using-custom-machine-config-pools-mcp-inheritance_{context}"]
= Managing machine configuration inheritance for a worker pool canary

You can configure a machine config pool (MCP) canary to inherit any `MachineConfig` assigned to an existing MCP. 
This configuration is useful when you want to use an MCP canary to test as you update the nodes of an existing MCP, one at a time.

.Prerequisites

* You have created one or more custom machine config pools (MCP).

.Procedure

. Create a secondary MCP as described in the following two steps:
.. Save the following configuration file as `machineConfigPool.yaml`.
+
.Example `machineConfigPool` YAML
[source,yaml]

> ----

Reviewer 3: Which parts of this sample have to stay as-is and which might the user tinker with?

Author: Things such as names can be changed - this is just an example - but any change here would have to be replicated in subsequent steps that refer back to the named MCP.

metadata:
  name: worker-perf
spec:
  machineConfigSelector:
    matchExpressions:
      - {
         key: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role,
         operator: In,
         values: [worker,worker-perf]
        }
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf: "" 
----
+
.. Create the new machine config pool by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f machineConfigPool.yaml
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,terminal]
----
machineconfigpool.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/worker-perf created
----

. Add some machines to the secondary MCP.
The following example labels the worker nodes, `worker-b` and `worker-c` to the MCP `worker-perf`:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node worker-b node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf=''
$ oc label node worker-c node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf=''
----

. Create a new `MachineConfig` for the MCP `worker-perf` as described in the following two steps:
.. Save the following `MachineConfig` example as `new-machineconfig.yaml`.
+
.Example `MachineConfig` YAML
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfig
metadata:
  labels:

>     machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: workers-perf

Author: Thanks @sergiordlr I've corrected all mentions of `workers-perf`

>     machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: workers-perf

Reviewer 2: thanks @slovern ; yes I have updated the 'worker' to workers at some point in the original document. 
so either use : workers- with S or worker- with no S everywhere.

  name: 06-kdump-enable-workers-perf
spec:
  config:
    ignition:
      version: 3.2.0
    systemd:
      units:
      - enabled: true
        name: kdump.service
  kernelArguments:
    - crashkernel=512M
----

.. Apply the `MachineConfig` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f new-machineconfig.yaml
----

. Create the new canary MCP and add machines from the MCP you created in the previous steps.

> The following example creates the an MCP called `worker-perf-canary` MCP, and adds machines from the `worker-perf` to it. 

Author: OK

.. Label the canary worker node `worker-a` by running the following command: 
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc label node worker-a node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf-canary=''

Reviewer 4: It says `Create the new canary MCP and add machines from the MCP you created in the previous steps.`

I understand that we need to add to the new canary MCP the machines that we added to the "worker-perf" MCP. Is it like that?

We added worker-b and worker-c to the "worker-perf" MCP, but in this example we are adding "worker-a" to the new canary MCP. Is it ok? 

We should add worker-b or worker-c to the new canary instead of worker-a, right? (or add worker-a to the initial worker-perf MCP too at the beginning of the example)

We need to remove the worker-perf label after adding the worker-perf-canary label too, because a node cannot belong to 2 custom MCPs at the same time.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to make it clear that :  all workers are member of workers-perf MCP firstly, then we move one of them to workers-perf-canary?

Reviewer 4: Hello! No, it is not necessary to remove the "worker" label, just the "worker-pef" label.

Author: @sergiordlr Added a step to remove the `worker-perf` label

----

.. Save the following file as `machineConfigPool-Canary.yaml`.
+
.Example `machineConfigPool-Canary.yaml` file
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfigPool
metadata:
  name: worker-perf-canary
spec:
  machineConfigSelector:
    matchExpressions:
      - {
         key: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role,
         operator: In,

>          values: [worker-perf,worker-perf-canary] <1>

Reviewer 2: @sergiordlr  : why you say , "All MCPs must inherit from worker pool" ? our point is about using the a special MCP (Called worker-perf ). This is used in telco: they usually do not care about the original worker MCP and create one for performance nodes and here we are discussing how to use that to make inheritance and canary update in the same time

>          values: [worker-perf,worker-perf-canary] <1>

Author: @sergiordlr I've added `worker` to the list of values

worker-b   Ready    worker,worker-perf          5d15h   v1.27.13+e709aa5
worker-c   Ready    worker,worker-perf          5d15h   v1.27.13+e709aa5
----

.. Verify that `kdump` service is enabled on `worker-a` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ systemctl status kdump.service
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME       STATUS   ROLES                        AGE     VERSION
...
kdump.service - Crash recovery kernel arming
     Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/kdump.service; enabled; preset: disabled)
     Active: active (exited) since Tue 2024-09-03 12:44:43 UTC; 10s ago
    Process: 4151139 ExecStart=/usr/bin/kdumpctl start (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
   Main PID: 4151139 (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
----

.. Verify that the MCP has updated the `crashkernel` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat /proc/cmdline
----
+
The output should include the updated `crashekernel` value, for example:
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
crashkernel=512M
----

. (Optional) If you are satisfied with the upgrade, you can return `worker-a` to `worker-perf` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc label node worker-a node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf=''

Reviewer 4: To return the node from worker-perf-canary MCP to worker-perf again, apart from adding the worker-perf label we need to remove the worker-perf-canary label.

If we don't remove the worker-perf-canary label, the node will be long to 2 MCPs at the same time and the controller will report an error because it is forbidden.

Author: Updated the step. Thanks

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/updating_a_cluster/update-using-custom-machine-config-pools.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="update-using-custom-machine-config-pools-mcp-inheritance_{context}"]
= Managing machine configuration inheritance for a worker pool canary

> You can configure a machine config pool (MCP) canary to inherit any `MachineConfig` assigned to an existing MCP. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This configuration is useful when you want to use an MCP canary to test as you update nodes one at a time for an existing MCP.
```

Author: There were two lines here

You can configure a machine config pool (MCP) canary to inherit any MachineConfig assigned to an existing MCP. This configuration is useful when you want to use an MCP canary to test as you update the nodes of an existing MCP, one at a time.

I think you meant to replace the second one, rather than line 9.

Reviewer 5: Yes. Not sure what happened here. My suggestion targets the second sentence.

This configuration is useful when you want to use an MCP canary to test as you update the nodes of an existing MCP, one at a time.

.Prerequisites

> * You have created one or more custom machine config pools (MCP).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* You have created one or more custom MCPs.
```

.Procedure

> . Create a secondary MCP as described in the following two steps:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Create a secondary MCP as described in the following two steps:
+
```

Best to add the pluses in the event that things go awkward on the customer portal.

.. Save the following configuration file as `machineConfigPool.yaml`.
+
.Example `machineConfigPool` YAML
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfigPool
metadata:
  name: worker-perf
spec:
  machineConfigSelector:
    matchExpressions:
      - {
         key: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role,
         operator: In,
         values: [worker,worker-perf]
        }
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:

>       node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf: "" 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf: "" 
# ...
```

As per our guidelines doc: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#signs-and-symbols-in-code-blocks

----
+
.. Create the new machine config pool by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f machineConfigPool.yaml
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,terminal]
----
machineconfigpool.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/worker-perf created
----

> . Add some machines to the secondary MCP.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Add some machines to the secondary MCP. The following example labels the worker nodes `worker-a`, `worker-b`, and `worker-c` to the MCP `worker-perf`:
```

Remove hard wrap.

The following example labels the worker nodes `worker-a`, `worker-b`, and `worker-c` to the MCP `worker-perf`:
+

> [source,terminal]

Reviewer 5: Single command per code block:

https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#single-command-per-code-block

----
$ oc label node worker-a node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf=''
$ oc label node worker-b node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf=''
$ oc label node worker-c node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf=''
----

> . Create a new `MachineConfig` for the MCP `worker-perf` as described in the following two steps:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Create a new `MachineConfig` for the MCP `worker-perf` as described in the following two steps:
+
```

.. Save the following `MachineConfig` example as a file called `new-machineconfig.yaml`:
+
.Example `MachineConfig` YAML
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfig
metadata:
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker-perf
  name: 06-kdump-enable-worker-perf
spec:
  config:
    ignition:
      version: 3.2.0
    systemd:
      units:
      - enabled: true
        name: kdump.service
  kernelArguments:

>     - crashkernel=512M

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - crashkernel=512M
# ...
```

----

.. Apply the `MachineConfig` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f new-machineconfig.yaml
----

> . Create the new canary MCP and add machines from the MCP you created in the previous steps.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Create the new canary MCP and add machines from the MCP you created in the previous steps. The following example creates an MCP called `worker-perf-canary`, and adds machines from the `worker-perf` MCP you created in the first step to it.
```

Remove the hard wrap. 

![Uploading Screenshot from 2024-09-17 15-47-14.png…]()

> The following example creates an MCP called `worker-perf-canary`, and adds machines from the `worker-perf` MCP you created in the first step to it. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following example creates an MCP called `worker-perf-canary` and adds machines from the `worker-perf` MCP that you previously created. 
```

----

.. Remove the canary worker node `worker-a` from the original MCP by running the following command: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node worker-a node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf-
----

.. Save the following file as `machineConfigPool-Canary.yaml`.
+
.Example `machineConfigPool-Canary.yaml` file
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfigPool
metadata:
  name: worker-perf-canary
spec:
  machineConfigSelector:
    matchExpressions:
      - {
         key: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role,
         operator: In,
         values: [worker,worker-perf,worker-perf-canary] <1>
        }
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-perf-canary: ""
----
<1> Optional value. This example includes `worker-perf-canary` as an additional value. You can use a value in this way to configure members of an additional `MachineConfig`.

.. Create the new `worker-perf-canary` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f machineConfigPool-Canary.yaml
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
machineconfigpool.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/worker-perf-canary created
----

> . Check if the `MachineConfig` is inherited in `worker-perf-canary`. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Check if the `MachineConfig` is inherited in `worker-perf-canary`. 
+
```

----
NAME       STATUS   ROLES                        AGE     VERSION
...
worker-a   Ready    worker,worker-perf-canary   5d15h   v1.27.13+e709aa5
worker-b   Ready    worker,worker-perf          5d15h   v1.27.13+e709aa5
worker-c   Ready    worker,worker-perf          5d15h   v1.27.13+e709aa5
----

.. Verify that `kdump` service is enabled on `worker-a` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ systemctl status kdump.service
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME       STATUS   ROLES                        AGE     VERSION
...
kdump.service - Crash recovery kernel arming
     Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/kdump.service; enabled; preset: disabled)
     Active: active (exited) since Tue 2024-09-03 12:44:43 UTC; 10s ago
    Process: 4151139 ExecStart=/usr/bin/kdumpctl start (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
   Main PID: 4151139 (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
----

.. Verify that the MCP has updated the `crashkernel` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat /proc/cmdline
----
+
The output should include the updated `crashekernel` value, for example:
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
crashkernel=512M
----

> . (Optional) If you are satisfied with the upgrade, you can return `worker-a` to `worker-perf`. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Optional: If you are satisfied with the upgrade, you can return `worker-a` to `worker-perf`. 
```

![Screenshot from 2024-09-17 15-42-24](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fb87f01f-22ff-46f5-8b79-1698ccd8fa65)
